The student of India who would at the same time be an historian,
discovers to his sorrow that the land of his researches is lamentably
poor in historical sources. And if within the realm of historical
investigation, a more seductive charm lies for him in the analysis of
great personalities than in ascertaining the course of historical
development, then verily may he look about in vain for such
personalities in the antiquity and middle ages of India. Not that the
princely thrones were wanting in great men in ancient India, for we
find abundant traces of them in Hindu folk-lore and poetry, but these
sources do not extend to establishing the realistic element in details
and furnishing life-like portraits of the men themselves. That the
Hindu has ever been but little interested in historical matters is a
generally recognized fact. Religious and philosophical speculations,
dreams of other worlds, of previous and future existences, have
claimed the attention of thoughtful minds to a much greater degree
than has historical reality.

  [Footnote A: This essay is art enlarged form of an address delivered
  on the occasion of the birthday of King Wilhelm II of Württemberg, on
  February 25, 1909.]

The misty myth-woven veil which hangs over persons and events of
earlier times, vanishes at the beginning of the modern era which in
India starts with the Mohammedan conquest, for henceforth the history
of India is written by foreigners. Now we meet with men who take a
decisive part in the fate of India, and they appear as sharply
outlined, even though generally unpleasing, personalities.

Islam has justly been characterized as the caricature of a religion.
Fanaticism and fatalism are two conspicuously irreligious emotions,
and it is exactly these two emotions, which Islam understands how to
arouse in savage peoples, to which it owes the part it has played in
the history of the world, and the almost unprecedented success of its
diffusion in Asia, Africa and Europe.

About 1000 A.D. India was invaded by the Sultan Mahmud of Ghasna.
"With Mahmud's expedition into India begins one of the most horrible
periods of the history of Hindustan. One monarch dethrones another, no
dynasty continues in power, every accession to the throne is
accompanied by the murder of kinsmen, plundering of cities,
devastation of the lowlands and the slaughter of thousands of men,
women and children of the predecessor's adherents; for five centuries
northwest and northern India literally reeked with the blood of
multitudes."[1] Mohammedan dynasties of Afghan, Turkish and Mongolian
origin follow that of Ghasna. This entire period is filled with an
almost boundless series of battles, intrigues, imbroglios and
political revolutions; nearly all events had the one characteristic in
common, that they took place amid murder, pillage and fire.

  [Footnote 1: E. Schlagintweit, _Indien in Wort und Bild_, II, 26 f.]

[Illustration: AKBAR, EMPEROR OF INDIA.
  From Noer's _Kaiser Akbar_, (Frontispiece to Vol. II).]

The most frightful spectacle throughout these reeking centuries is the
terrible Mongolian prince Timur, a successor of Genghis-Khan, who fell
upon India with his band of assassins in the year 1398 and before his
entry into Delhi the capital, in which he was proclaimed Emperor of
India, caused the hundred thousand prisoners whom he had captured in
his previous battles in the Punjab, to be slaughtered in one single
day, because it was too inconvenient to drag them around with him. So
says Timur himself with shameless frankness in his account of the
expedition, and he further relates that after his entry into Delhi,
all three districts of the city were plundered "according to the will
of God."[2] In 1526 Baber, a descendant of Timur, made his entry into
Delhi and there founded the dominion of the Grand Moguls (i.e., of the
great Mongols). The overthrow of this dynasty was brought about by the
disastrous reign of Baber's successor Aurungzeb, a cruel, crafty and
treacherous despot, who following the example of his ancestor Timur,
spread terror and alarm around him in the second half of the
seventeenth and the beginning of the eighteenth centuries. Even to-day
Hindus may be seen to tremble when they meet the sinister fanatical
glance of a Mohammedan.

Princes with sympathetic qualities were not entirely lacking in the
seven centuries of Mohammedan dominion in India, and they shine forth
as points of light from the gloomy horror of this time, but they fade
out completely before the luminous picture of the man who governed
India for half a century (1556-1605) and by a wise, gentle and just
reign brought about a season of prosperity such as the land had never
experienced in the millenniums of its history. This man, whose memory
even to-day is revered by the Hindus, was a descendant of Baber, Abul
Fath Jelâleddin Muhammed, known by the surname Akbar "the Great,"
which was conferred upon the child even when he was named, and
completely supplanted the name that properly belonged to him. And
truly he justified the epithet, for great, fabulously great, was Akbar
as man, general, statesman and ruler,--all in all a prince who
deserves to be known by every one whose heart is moved by the
spectacle of true human greatness.

  [Footnote 3: From the literature on Emperor Akbar the following works
  deserve special mention: J. Talboys Wheeler, _The History of India
  from the Earliest Ages._ Vol. IV, Pt. I, "Mussulman Rule," London,
  1876 (judges Akbar very unfairly in many places, but declares at the
  bottom of page 135, "The reign of Akbar is one of the most important
  in the history of India; it is one of the most important in the
  history of the world"); Mountstuart Elphinstone, _History of India,
  the Hindu and Mahometan Periods_, with notes and additions by E.B.
  Cowell, 9th ed., London, 1905; G.B. Malleson, _Akbar and the Rise of
  the Mughal Empire_, Oxford, 1890 (in W.W. Hunter's _Rulers of India_);
  A. Müller, _Der Islam im Morgen-und Abendland_, Vol. II, Berlin, 1887;
  but especially Count F.A. von Noer, _Kaiser Akbar, ein Versuch über
  die Geschichte Indiens im sechzehnten Jahrhundert_, Vol. I, Leyden,
  1880; Vol. II, revised from the author's manuscript by Dr. Gustav von
  Buchwald, Leyden, 1885. In the preface to this work the original
  sources are listed and described; compare also M. Elphinstone, 

When we wish to understand a personality we are in the habit of
ascertaining the inherited characteristics, and investigating the
influences exercised upon it by religion, family, environment,
education, youthful impressions, experience, and so forth. Most men
are easily comprehensible as the products of these factors. The more
independent of all such influences, or the more in opposition to them,
a personality develops, the more attractive and interesting will it
appear to us. At the first glance it looks as if the Emperor Akbar had
developed his entire character from himself and by his own efforts in
total independence of all influences which in other cases are thought
to determine the character and nature of a man. A Mohammedan, a
Mongol, a descendant of the monster Timur, the son of a weak incapable
father, born in exile, called when but a lad to the government of a
disintegrated and almost annihilated realm in the India of the
sixteenth century,--which means in an age of perfidy, treachery,
avarice, and self-seeking,--Akbar appears before us as a noble man,
susceptible to all grand and beautiful impressions, conscientious,
unprejudiced, and energetic, who knew how to bring peace and order out
of the confusion of the times, who throughout his reign desired the
furtherance of his subjects' and not of his own interest, who while
increasing the privileges of the Mohammedans, not only also declared
equality of rights for the Hindus but even actualized that equality,
who in every conceivable way sought to conciliate his subjects so
widely at variance with each other in race, customs, and religion, and
who finally when the narrow dogmas of his religion no longer satisfied
him, attained to a purified faith in God, which was independent of all
formulated religions.

A closer observation, however, shows that the contrast is not quite so
harsh between what according to our hypotheses Akbar should have been
as a result of the forces which build up man, and what he actually
became. His predilection for science and art Akbar had inherited from
his grandfather Baber and his father Humâyun. His youth, which was
passed among dangers and privations, in flight and in prison, was
certainly not without a beneficial influence upon Akbar's development
into a man of unusual power and energy. And of significance for his
spiritual development was the circumstance that after his accession to
the throne his guardian put him in the charge of a most excellent
tutor, the enlightened and liberal minded Persian Mir Abdullatîf, who
laid the foundation for Akbar's later religious and ethical views.
Still, however high we may value the influence of this teacher, the
main point lay in Akbar's own endowments, his susceptibility for such
teaching as never before had struck root with any Mohammedan prince.
Akbar had not his equal in the history of Islam. "He is the only
prince grown up in the Mohammedan creed whose endeavor it was to
ennoble the limitation of this most separatistic of all religions into
a true religion of humanity."

Even the external appearance of Akbar appeals to us sympathetically.
We sometimes find reproduced a miniature from Delhi which pictures
Akbar as seated; in this the characteristic features of the Mongolian
race appear softened and refined to a remarkable degree. The shape
of the head is rather round, the outlines are softened, the black
eyes large, thoughtful, almost dreamy, and only very slightly
slanting, the brows full and bushy, the lips somewhat prominent and
the nose a tiny bit hooked. The face is beardless except for the
rather thin closely cut moustache which falls down over the curve of
the month in soft waves. According to the description of his son, the
Emperor Jehângir, Akbar's complexion is said to have been the yellow
of wheat; the Portuguese Jesuits who came to his court called it
plainly white. Although not exactly beautiful, Akbar seemed beautiful
to many of his contemporaries, including Europeans, probably because
of the august and at the same time kind and winsome expression which
his countenance bore. Akbar was rather tall, broad-shouldered,
strongly built and had long arms and hands.